hey it's your friend mel and welcome to the mel robbins podcast oh my god i just walked out of the studios here in boston i am so thrilled you're here i can't wait for you to listen to this today's episode it is the ultimate guide to understanding and optimizing women's hormones for better health at all ages this conversation is so important whether you're in high school you're in your twenties thirties forties fifties sixties or beyond because women's health is hormone health
so if you're tired bloated gaining weight in places you never used to if you're struggling with thinning hair or acne brain fog low sex drive mood swings pms painful periods our expert today is gonna tell you this is not how it needs to be and there is so much you need to understand and that you can do today you're gonna learn the signs of hormone imbalance and how to fix it at any age you'll also learn the surprising ways that hormone imbalance screws up your skin messes with your weight disrupts your sleep and
so much more you'll hear about the best foods that support hormone health how to fix thinning hair and everything you wanna know about hormones and skin including acne and aging saggy skin our guest today is world renowned ob gyn doctor jessica shepherd she's here with the answers you need and i'm telling you something this conversation is so incredible as soon as i'm done talking to you i'm sending this to my 2 daughters every single 1 of their friends i'm sending this to every single person in my life who is struggling to get pregnant who's ever complained about their period i'm gonna send this to my mom because she's gonna feel
so vindicated and every 1 of my girlfriends and i know you're going to too but mostly i am just so happy you're listening today because i personally have never understood the female body or what hormones truly are or what they do or what is actually going on in your twenties thirties forties fifties and beyond and after listening today i do and so will you hey it's your friend mel and welcome to the mel robbins podcast i am
so excited that you're here the conversation that you're about to hear is life changing and i wanna say it's always such an honor to spend time and to be together with you and if you're a new listener i also wanna take a moment and welcome you to the mel robbins podcast family and here's 1 thing i wanted to say because you made the time to listen to this particular episode here's what i know about you you're the kind of person who values information that can help you take control of your health and make you feel your absolute best at every single day no matter how old or young you may be and if you're listening to this right
now because someone in your life shared this episode with you i just think that's really cool because here's what that means it means you have people in your life that care about you they want you to be healthy and they know that understanding and knowing how to optimize your hormones that it's critical for your overall health that's why they sent that to you and i think that's just really cool that you have people in your life that care about you so thank you for listening to this thank you for being here i'm so excited because our guest today is gonna help us do exactly that understand our bodies understand our hormones and help us optimize them for better health doctor jessica shepherd is a board certified ob gyn who specializes in women's health sexual wellness and menopause doctor shepherd completed her medical residency at drexel university she also completed a fellowship in minimally invasive gynecological surgery at the university of louisville where she also earned her mba doctor shepherd also served as the director of minimally invasive gynecologic surgery at the university of illinois at chicago before leaving to practice at baylor university where she is still affiliated today she sits on the advisory boards for women's health magazine women'shealth.org and the society for women's health research and is the chief medical officer at the health care company hers doctor shepherd is also the author of the best selling book generation m living well in perimenopause and menopause
so please help me welcome doctor jessica shepherd to the mel robbins podcast doctor jessica shepherd i am so excited to meet you thank you for hopping on a a plane thank you for making the time i cannot wait to have this conversation with you
i'm just doubly excited to be here you are someone who i've listened to for a long time and the ability to be able to share my little slice of life with you and with everyone here i love it
well it's actually a very big slice of life and it's an aspect of life that a lot of us don't understand and so i cannot wait to learn from you and where i wanna start is i'd love to have you speak directly to the person who is with us right now who has made the time to learn from you and can you tell them what might be different about their life or the life of a woman that they love if they really take to heart everything you're about to teach us and share with us today and they apply it to their life what could change i would say you know for everyone who's listening and even myself i think this is where this really resonates is i'm going through that journey as well but why am i here and where do i want to be and that really is that opportunity of self care to say i get to be in charge of myself and many times we don't take that time to say what is really going on because that's when we really start to push away all the the narratives and the stories and what society tells us and that really is this transformation in life is to take some time take pause and say why am i here and where do i wanna be wow and what i'm excited about to learn from you doctor shepherd is oftentimes when you realize you don't feel how you wanna feel yeah or you're not where you want to be in your life in terms of your relationship to your health or how you feel or your energy or all aspects of your life right that you're not quite sure what the problem is and
so i think today is going to be life changing because you're about to teach us about our bodies and about hormones and the vital and transformative role that they can play so let's start with just talking about what made you interested in medicine and women's health
yeah it actually started from the ob world right bringing babies into the world and that was so fascinating to me and it's very exciting and as i was going through residency still love ob is when i really realized that there is this whole scope of a woman's life outside of pregnancy but when i really started to see women whether it was in their adolescence or even later on in life is that there's still so much to be taken care of that we really have that ability to interact and build relationship with women and that's where i really thrived and
so that after residency i actually did a surgical fellowship because i loved being in the or i love being able to really take something very complex mhmm and transform in a way that's helpful for them in the operating room and then coming back to who are you and how can i help you there
and how did being a surgeon impact you and lead you to where you are now and the philosophy that you have about medicine and human health
and most of the surgeries that i was doing a lot of times it had to do with women in their midlife
okay
and so when they would come into me with their diagnosis whether that was fibroids endometriosis i got to sit with them and talk to them about this diagnosis but what actually came out in the visit was all the other things that were going on in their life and so that's where i started to see our physical health has so much more to do with the mind body connection so they would come in and have a certain disease or something that was going on and i was like i know i can help you there because that's a surgical thing that i know i'm very skilled to do but what i'm really paying attention to are the other things that you're telling me that's going on with your life and your career taking care of your kids your relationship and that really has
so much more to do with how we show up and what we're able to capacitate what we're able to take in and that's when i was like something's going on in this midlife that i need to pay attention to more
well what i'm excited about is that you know you mentioned pregnancy yeah you mentioned doing all these surgeries if you really think about it and in the forward of your book doctor jennifer ashton writes about the fact that for most women the first time we truly get proactive about learning about our biology and our body for real is when we either are wanting to get pregnant or we are pregnant and so we dive into all of it and we track what's happening in our bodies and then even afterwards we're tracking what's happening with our bodies as things are changing you know and i think about myself and when i first got my period mhmm it sort of came and then i just had to deal right i had to figure out how to use a tampon i had to figure out how to navigate a swimming pool i had to figure out like that sort of stuff we didn't have any of the tracking tools or any of that stuff but it is interesting mhmm that a woman's body and health is incredibly elegant and intelligent and designed in this system right around the fertility cycle and the menstruation cycle and honestly most of us don't understand the role that hormones play yeah not not at all i think pregnancy you said it perfectly there is that's what society tells us what our worth is in the reproductive years but even as you said it in your experience which was similar to mine as far as getting your period you're just kind of like okay i'm gonna figure this out right but that was something that had to do with just self right but no 1 was really paying attention to that but when it came to
now you have to take care of someone else society's like here's your importance and then we dive into it because we're kind of feeding into that not to say that pregnancy is important that we don't love it but now we're fascinated and kind of giving more towards because we have to take care of someone else when we didn't even choose to take care of ourselves earlier when we were going through transition which is why i always see this with my patients that come in is that they're like now that i've kind of finished that phase of my life no one's really paying attention anymore and society has kind of deemed me maybe not that important right
so that's where i want women to pay attention to their worth
yeah and i'm so excited to dig into the role that hormones play in your health and on that point about women really thinking about this and if if you are listening and you're 1 of the millions of guys that listen to the show this is a really important conversation to listen to because it's gonna help you understand the women and young women in your life but it's also a resource that you can send to them because women are not little men that is what doctor stacy sims loves to say and understanding the unique physiology and biology is critical and we're gonna talk today about how hormones impact your skin and acne and hair and thinning hair and growing hair in places that you don't want yeah how hormones impact all kinds of health conditions and what i find to be very exciting is that finally we're at a moment where there is a lot of attention and education around menopause but that's like 50 years into a woman's story truly understanding the role that hormones play what they are yeah it impacts every aspect of your life and you know 1 other thing that you made me think about is that when i think for example just 1 human being ago
so just think about our moms how how
old are you i am 47
okay great so i'm 56 yeah if i think about our moms they typically grew up in a generation where the messaging at least in kinda like the sixties and seventies was okay you know you gotta do it all you gotta look good you gotta also keep the house together you gotta be able to take care of everybody there was 0 messaging about taking care of yourself
oh no that wasn't part of the memo
no and in fact if you look at any of sort of the marketing and advertising and television shows that our mothers watched there was no 1 helping them
no
they just had to do it all themselves and so no wonder our moms neglected themselves mhmm no wonder we don't really understand that putting ourselves first is really a skill that you need to learn and society has conditioned us to think oh no no no go see a doctor when you're sick oh no no no like i have a friend that has prolapse right now she's like it literally feels like which is i guess what when your uterus fall coming out things are coming my but you know 1 of my relatives had it they would literally be like it's like walking around with half a baby coming out of you and i'm like you're walking around like you should go see a doctor you know and but that's taking care of self and we're not trained to do that and
so let's just start by talking about hormones how do you wanna frame the conversation around hormones
i think hormones are these beautiful complex messengers so it's like we have these little mailmen that are or male women going around delivering messages every day like they are consistent they know what they're supposed to be doing and our our bodies are beautiful machines and they're meant to be well oil machines with these messengers giving off these messages whether it's to an organ like the brain or the ovaries hormones are probably 1 of the most important parts of how our machine runs
so is it like a liquid like what is a hormone like do you know what i'm saying like i'm i'm because as you're thinking messengers i'm like wait is it the wiring is it is it liquid like what what actually is a of
a you know we should we should go inward and talk about these hormones but it's actually the delivery of a kind of chemical
okay
yeah so it's a chemical that's released and from these messages that are being sent then someone can respond so so it's like i'm giving you a message and you're supposed to be doing this today at this time and so as we go through our lives we usually through our younger in younger years in our reproductive life have these hormones that are giving off these messages and they're just going like clockwork they're like i know where i supposed i'm supposed to be i know what time i'm supposed to go off and then we start to see that the hormones have little glitches they don't wanna show up to work some of the messages aren't being delivered and that's where we start to see those changes and fluctuations which is why exactly like you said we need to be having these conversations about hormones earlier
so that we're aware before they just kind of caput and they're out
well you know what's interesting is that like if you really think about the experience whether you are male or female
yeah
is when puberty hits the only thing that you hear from adults is oh hormones all the hormones are raging oh here are like and and nobody understands what it actually means or what means or what the hormone is doing so when you get to puberty though and the hormones start going crazy are you not born with this level of hormones you know what i'm saying like why are the hormones going crazy during
the year before yes because they are now getting the response of we now biologically want to start to deliver our follicles right so we're born with the amount of eggs that we'll ever have
okay
but the delivery of when they're gonna release every month starts at a certain time because our bodies are again beautiful machines which they know when they're going to start this process so in the ramping up for this actual delivery of like guys we got a job to do we got a new design of a job that we have to start yep everyone's running around because they're like where am i supposed to be okay you're there okay wait am i supposed to be doing this and over time which is when you start to see that fluctuation everyone's getting ready for the job and then finally they're like we've got it down we've done enough rehearsal we're ready to do the job okay i think i've got and i hope as you're listening or watching you kinda have this understanding of messengers number 1 uh-huh that are delivering a particular message and that your body has receptors all over it that are designed to receive hormone it's receiving delivery and receiving it's the most important part i would say of a hormone because they want to get that message across and then the hormones that disassemble you know
so the job now is kind of falling apart is is what's happening in perimenopause and menopause well when we go through a hormone decline which is the opposite of what we're doing when we're getting towards puberty and adolescence perimenopause is they're like biologically we're not gonna be doing that delivery system anymore we're gonna slow down this project now and people are like okay then i'll come off here i'm just not gonna show up to work anymore and that's when you start to see the fluctuation of what happens to hormones in the perimenopausal phase so they're kind of saying that job that we used to do for 30 plus years of giving off an egg at a certain time every part of the month we're not really doing that anymore and
so that's when you start to see the offloading of what happens with hormones which is why we now experience all those symptoms in perimenopause
got it and does the same thing happen to men if they experience low testosterone
they do but their decline is much slower over a longer timeframe
gotcha
and so that's why you still can have men who are in their 70s and 80s still you know being able to have or you know contribute sperm and you get pregnant but we no longer can after a certain age which is why women experience menopause
gotcha okay so in turn i would love to break down each time period in a person's life and kind of understand exactly what's going on with your hormones and what hormones matter the most during that period of time what are the key hormones that you need to actually understand are important and play a role in your health well all hormones for men and women obviously play that specific role but when we speak to just women and how they're gonna experience life i think that's the best way to frame it is how are you experiencing life what's contributing to the factors that really are kind of key and specific to women i would say estrogen progesterone and testosterone as well as our thyroid hormones but men do have thyroid hormones as well as well as estrogen and testosterone we just have it in different levels but for women i would say estrogen progesterone testosterone and our thyroid hormones and can we group the thyroid hormones together or they're a bunch of them we can they're kind of like cousins
so they're kind of like in separate pods but they're kind of in the same neighborhood and
okay
and really contribute toward each other but estrogen progesterone and testosterone
okay so estrogen progesterone testosterone
yeah
now we hear a ton
uh-huh
about cortisol
yeah
and serotonin uh-huh and that's that's a hormone right yeah
those are hormones
okay and some other ones yeah who i now can't remember but are they as important they are important from understanding when it comes to women's health or is it important for us to just start with estrogen progesterone and testosterone
i usually like to categorize it as maybe if we were to say our menopausal metabolic and mitochondrial hormones and so cortisol is really i like to put it in the metabolic kind of family of when we talk about hormones because it has such a broad impact on our entire body system whereas and
what does metabolic mean
so metabolic means the things that function in how we regulate the activity of our entire body so metabolically we would say if you have metabolic hormones that are being shifted that's usually when we talk to insulin and glucose and how our body is able to absorb glucose utilize glucose as a fuel so cortisol really has a lot to do with that as far as metabolic functions
okay so we're gonna shove that to the side you can shove that to the side and we'll stay right here with estrogen progesterone estrogen progesterone testosterone
yeah
and let's start with puberty
mhmm
what is going on when puberty hits for a young woman what is the general age range at this point and what are the roles that those 3 hormones mhmm play for a woman
so i would definitely say what we have started to see you know over the last few decades is typically when we start our period that age has become younger
why
and so that age has become younger because of environmental factors a lot of the things that we have in our environment a lot of the foods that we eat so it actually is something that we should be researching in a way of why is this happening and is this something that has implications on our life later on and when i say later on like your fifties and i would think so sarah absolutely you know why because cortisol which we kind of bring it back into the conversation a little has a lot to do with is this the reason why we're starting to see our women or young girls starting to have their periods at a younger age and
so what's happening is you're starting to have this onboarding right we talked about this complex complexity of our bodies and the systems and how it's being regulated so the onboarding time is a little bit earlier now and so what's happening is that estrogen is starting to rev up because our bodies want to release this egg in order to have a menstrual cycle and so it starts that process earlier and estrogen and progesterone are gonna be those those key hormones that are gonna filter into when am i gonna be high when am i gonna be low right we talked about how they're coming into themselves as a system and a bodily function in order to accomplish an event which is your menstrual cycle
so what is the role of estrogen estrogen really i i like to
call it our vitality hormone because we really see when we look at our menstrual cycle or even when women come to me and they have changes in their menstrual cycle we typically like to say how is estrogen functioning and as a vitality hormone what is it contributing maybe it's a little bit too much here or a little too little and how can we alter it in a way where you can get back to your maybe your your normal rhythm or your normal menstrual cycle so it builds up when we're starting our period and it really is creating your body's in default actually to get pregnant which is the whole reason for your menstrual cycle is to conceive and to get pregnant is it important as a woman to understand that your entire health and the way to think about your health you really have to embrace that the natural intelligence of your body the baseline is it is designed as a baby making machine i would say biologically that's what if we were to look at it just from like key you know key framework like i'm just literally just like your tongue is designed to taste absolutely your legs are designed to move in a certain way you're like that that you are designed with sort of this biological impair and i'm only saying you know i mean biologically to do that function yes what i want to make sure that we understand is it doesn't necessarily mean that we have to do that oh of course right right of course but i think that society does teach us that that's what you're designed to do and that's what you're supposed to do yes yeah i the reason why i'm i'm kind of taking a highlighter to that is because you know we know that of course because you have a period that you have to deal with but if you really start at a baseline and you say to yourself okay women are not little men and our bodies all the way down from chromosomes to the way our muscles are to the way the hormones work we our bodies are completely different yeah and understanding that it is designed to work on this cycle and the cycle is driven by hormones is the base of all health correct and i would say that once you understand that then you can embrace it for what it is okay and not fight it right and work with it and not work against it okay
so before you get your period this is gonna sound like the world's dumbest questions do you have estrogen like like i like you know what i'm saying like is this
everyone in
your body everyone is
born with the amount of hormones or the the hormones that we have how they function changes during the life cycle
wait you are born with the amount of hormones you have
well not the amount but you have the hormone
okay gotcha
how they function
gotcha
changes over the course of our lives which is why we see those changes at adolescence and then perimenopause
so even before you have a period you still have estrogen testosterone and progesterone in your system it's that when you start getting your period those hormones yeah flood into the system in order to bring this developmental phase online
and that's why i love the body it is so complex but so elegant because it was always there but the need for it to do the job that it was designed to do at that time in your life that's when it knows i need to start doing this so it's the onboarding but that's what i love about the kind of basic fundamental part of the body and that's why we do we should embrace every part of our lives
so you said that the average age is getting younger and younger
and 1
of the reasons is
the food and environmental and ultra processed foods and yep and cortisol is small stress and that's where cortisol is our stress hormone and it responds to stress and so when we have stressors that are showing up early in our lives a lot of it has to do with the experiences that we have environmental factors in food then that's why we're starting to see that girls are starting to have their periods much younger
is that because cortisol confuses the kind of design of the body in terms of when it's time to bring this online or is it the food
it's more so that the cortisol is responding to these stressors and then onboarding much too early or much too high of a level than when it's supposed to
oh mhmm gotcha
yeah it enters the scene when it shouldn't be
yes
and we're like you're not really supposed to be appearing at this part of the script but you're here and so now we were gonna respond to you
gotcha yeah so what are some of the issues mhmm that happen during that window because you know i can think about it seems like so many young women also now have complicated cycles whether it's lots of cramps and so what are the roles that estrogen progesterone and testosterone are playing in that window in the teenage years up to 20
so the roles that they're playing is getting the body ready for this now 30 year or maybe 20 year thing that they're gonna be doing okay so that's when you start to see like the breasts enlarge you start to see hair growth right you start to see changes in the external genitalia and that has a lot to do with how the hormones are responding it's getting the body ready and also to do the thing that we talked about to get ready for pregnancy and that's what the body has the capacity to do in your reproductive years and so that's when women start to see changes in their moods how i mean how many times have you heard you know adolescent girls and and going through puberty again yes that mood is there because our neurotransmitters which are also hormones are responding to these changes when we start to onboard our estrogen progesterone and testosterone to do the function of the period
so when you move into your twenties what is what's going on with hormones
hormones are at this point should be functioning very consistently we know what our job is we're having a cycle we may get pregnant go through the pregnancy repeat baseline what we're doing again so that's when it should be kind of we should be okay this is typically when women might start to come in with issues with maybe pain with their cycles or maybe heavier cycles yes yeah and so it really should be kind of even keeled during this time frame but that's not what we always see
so if it's not even keeled meaning a pretty regular cycle
mhmm
and a pretty predictable kind of route of these are the days i'm kind of moody or grumpy or whatever these are the days i kind of get those weird cramps but if you have an irregular period or you have heavy bleeding or you have really bad pms what does that tell you as a medical doctor
when women come in i always like to peel the layers back
okay
because that's very subjective and subjective meaning everyone has different experiences what are their tolerance to that experience what's going on in their life how do they deal with stressors and i'll give you an example and this is where i love the beauty of these conversations is to always recognize that everyone has a different template and everyone has a different experience in life and so a lot of my women especially women of color who come in have different stressors and because of what's going on in their environment whether that's racism whether that's poverty whether that's increased stress or that's the cortisol yep a lot of what they're experiencing is a lot different to women who are not in those particular environments and
so that's part of peeling the layers back especially as a physician when women come into me is not looking at just the issue that's going on and saying what else is going on in your life and that's the mind body connection and so when we are able to look at those factors versus maybe it's a food issue there are a lot of foods that can change how our hormones respond
like what foods change how your hormones respond
so your processed foods your foods that have high glycemic index that have a lot of sugar a lot of soft drinks i do see a lot of my patients who are in that timeframe when i look at their diet i'm like let's let's start here because for me that's a lifestyle change that can impact you greatly and i don't necessarily have to put you on a medication so that might be a better way of looking at it and also with exercise exercise does have a beautiful way of releasing other chemicals and hormones in our body that can help regulate our period but we have to utilize that and then also stressors what's going on in your life this is is notorious for stressors women come in and they will say i'm having all these changes in my cycle whether it's heavier lighter irregular doesn't matter i will always ask them what's going on in your personal life what's going on in work life and again when we have that session that's why ob gyns are actually usually said that they're also psychologists because we absorb a lot of what's going on in their life when they come in for a visit i think it's fascinating that stress in your life yes and the food that you're eating impacts the hormones in your body categorically and i will say that like emphatically because our lifestyle and how we conduct our lives on the outside with those factors of food nutrition exercise really does change the game and that's why we are starting to see when we get into later life or even in midlife that that is also a very important part of what your body's going to be able to do your body can only do what you give it and if we're not giving it the things that it can thrive then that's when it's like i may not be able to perform at my best ability where exactly is estrogen made you know what i'm saying like
so i'm starting to think now okay now wait a minute so i mean it makes sense that if you're going through a breakup or you're you know a person who is subjected to chronic like bias and you know racism or you're under a tremendous amount of stress because you're caring for somebody or you're just constantly eating terrible stuff right think about somebody that i love deeply who had a very big issue with an eating disorder and just destroyed their gut health and i can't even imagine the kind of stress that they put themselves under and it i mean of course it would impact your like when you explain it that way doctor shepherd it makes a lot of sense but why do these things impact estrogen and progesterone and testosterone i'm
so glad you asked this question because what does it have to do with the mind because the brain usually is the control center for a lot of hormones so it is the 1 that is going to tell the ovary i need you to kind of give off a little bit of estrogen today we're gonna give off this much we're gonna dial it down on this day because we're getting ready for ovulation all those different messages are usually generated from the brain so imagine what happens with our neurotransmitters when we undergo stressful situations whether it's something that happens when you're crossing the street and you almost run over by a car versus exactly what you said a stressor in life that's really taking over your all your thoughts your everyday life that your brain can respond to that in a way where it's trying to help you cope with that stress but what happens is when we have stress the brain can't give off the message to all the other hormones in the way that it could when it wasn't as distracted and that's why we have to as physicians get better at mind body connection it makes
so much sense
yeah
and what's sad is you know you you your period gets irregular or you start you know having massive cramps and then you think that you need some medication and you're not looking at the underlying factors because i didn't ever understood that stress or eating ultra processed food or basically starving myself to be skinny is going to of course impact the hormonal functioning of my body because i'm confusing it with all these things yeah why do so many women in their twenties get quote hormonal acne yeah hormonal acne again when we think of there's different types of acne just there can be stuff that is due to chemicals that maybe you know you're using on your face that are not the best but usually a lot is hormonal and you can actually sometimes tell by where it is on your body what where you're getting yes
so most hormonal acne can be mostly in kind of the area by under right under the eyes or the chin
why does it go there
because when we're thinking of where the hormones you have receptors all over your body that respond to hormones and so the receptors that maybe respond more to estrogen or testosterone there's gonna be features on or areas on your face that are gonna be more prone to the actual area of the breakout right and so when we think of what kind of spurs on these changes in hormones which will then trigger hormonal a lot of it has to do with testosterone testosterone has a lot to do with sebaceous glands right so our sebaceous glands are the ones on all parts of our body that hold the oil cause we need oil you know your face that's how our body functions we need oil secretion but when there's a buildup of those areas and in the glands can be an increase in testosterone as well which then elicit the buildup of oil which then you get bacteria and then you have acne wow yeah and
so do you see this a lot with 20 year olds
i do they come in and usually what is the best way to treat them so it's a great relationship we have with dermatologists because they'll have these patients come into them and a lot of dermatologists will actually send the patient back to an ob gyn because typically we will put them on birth control pills to kind of help quiet down this kind of overwhelm of hormones and responds to that and a lot of it has to do with the testosterone feature of what's being elevated what's creating that message being sent and then you have the outcome of the hormonal acne wow yeah you know i wanna take a quick pause right here
so we can give our amazing sponsors a chance to share a few words and i also want to give you a chance to share doctor jessica shepherd with every single woman in your life i am thinking about my 2 daughters in their twenties i'm thinking about all my friends i'm thinking about my mom i'm gonna send this with her with my nieces like literally everybody this is going on reply all immediately and what a gift what a gift to empower the women in your life with this extraordinary medical information alrighty don't go anywhere because doctor jessica shepherd she is just getting started class is gonna get back in session after this short break and we're gonna be waiting for you to welcome you in we'll see you in a few minutes
welcome back it's your buddy mel robbins today you and i are learning from doctor jessica shepherd her best selling book is called generation m and we are doing a deep dive into the medical and scientific research around hormones and the roles that it plays in women's health this is such a critical topic so i'm thrilled that you're here i'm thrilled that we're learning together so doctor shepherd can you speak to you know a person listening in their twenties or thirties who you know comes off birth control mhmm and then has a lot of issues after like what do you want them to know i want them to know that the body is really trying to get to homeostasis and homeostasis is just that kind of perfect balance that the body needs to be able to do the functions that it wants to do
now when we're on birth control the goal of birth control is to somewhat suppress or kind of decrease the activity of your hormones that your body naturally produces okay and when it does that it is doing the job of what it's supposed to be doing is preventing pregnancy by decreasing the suppression or rather the release of an egg right your body's in default to get pregnant every month
right so
it wants to release an egg
so what happens to all those hormones in your body if it's suppressed
they're still there they're still doing what they're supposed to be doing but the birth control is kind of keeping it a little bit more suppressed so it can't do the function it wants to do okay so when you come off now you're lifting off this veil that was always there and suppressing so now your hormones are like we can go back to what we were doing and it's trying to find that homeostasis and sometimes you might have highs sometimes you might have lows
so what might somebody expect and what would you say doctor shepherd is a good amount of time to give your body to like ah okay what's happening here
immediate gratification is usually what we want when it comes to our bodies and i always am coaching my patients to give their bodies grace and when i say that in a time frame that may be 3 to 6 months i've had some patients who may take 9 months to a year to kind of regulate and get back to what they used to be but just like after pregnancy we always want our bodies to kind of be
perfect like
8 weeks after but our body doesn't function like that and so even in the perimenopausal phase going through these changes we need to give our bodies more grace and time to do the thing that it's designed to do but we can't push the agenda as quickly as we would like so 3 to 6 months usually i would say give it that time frame and when they come back in i'll be like well where are we because remember it's a gradient they may see you know that they're improving over 3 to 6 months but maybe not getting all the way back to where they were and and so maybe we can push out time a little bit more okay and you know it's interesting because i think about the fact that
so many young women mhmm go on birth control
right
and you know you do it for a number of medical reasons which i am in full support of but is there anything that we should be aware of if you have been on the pill or you're taking 1 of the coded iuds for 2 decades of your life
and then all
of a sudden you're like okay let's like stop taking the pill let's take out the iud and you've been doing this hormone suppression for 15 or 20 years
yeah you are gonna see changes and and a lot of that has to do with we were not used to seeing what the body was naturally doing for that long so now when you're exposed to it you're like this is off putting or this is weird but really the body may be like oh i was kinda doing this all along we just weren't really aware of it because we had some suppression so that can be changes in how your cycle comes back people may experience that it's heavier or maybe they are having longer cycles in duration and that may be because the birth control is kind of not doing what it wanted to do yeah you also may see changes in skin you may also see changes in hair what changes do you see in hair
so hair you can start to see that maybe they're gonna have more thinning or falling out with their hair because it's the shift in the hormones right so it's not that there's something wrong all the time
it feels like it's wrong when it's slippery right like a dust ball on the grain when there
is a lump of hair in your hands it does feel so wrong what the body is trying to do is get back to that homeostasis right so our
why are you losing hair
because the it's the shift right so you were suppressing your hormones with this birth control and now that you're lifting it off it can skyrocket back to what it wanted to be right it's like oh well no no one's kinda keeping me down i'm gonna come out and the hair cycle is impacted by hormones right so how are our hair goes through cycles and phases of growth when it falls out when it's gonna you know be what it wants to be within the cycle those can all change due to what our hormones are telling it right hormones are chemical deliverers
so is every single function in a woman's body impacted by estrogen
absolutely there are estrogen receptors all over the body you know in generation m there is like this i was like this diagram has to go in this book because we have typecast estrogen and progesterone just to the pelvis just to the pelvis that's true
because i think about estrogen and i'm like well it's just talking to my ovaries like what are you what are you talking about why
it was talking to your brain it's talking to your muscle your heart which is exactly why we see when estrogen goes down after menopause what do we have we have heart disease our bones are weaker our brain goes through this fog and that's because estrogen receptors are there so if it's not able to deliver the message then that area of your body is like i'm not gonna function the way that i used to or would like to because estrogen is not there
what is a few places in a woman's body that somebody might be surprised to hear mhmm has estrogen as a very critical piece of how that part of your body functions
you know what i say is the most fascinating is the brain and you know why because even as an ob gyn it's like you know it but you don't know it i don't think i realized how much of an impact that estrogen makes on the brain until maybe 5 10 years ago
so what impact does it make on the brain
it has an impact on mood it has an impact on cognition how we're able to function how we're able to use our prefrontal cortex we become more limbic in our responses what does limbic mean limbic means that emotional right oh yes that kind of jump to the right and what do we hear that women who are in their perimenopausal phase are more moody right
well that's also what we hear about pms absolutely so is pms like a mini drop in estrogen in your body
it's a drop and then so the fluctuation it may go down and come up really quick but unfortunately in perimenopause it's going down but it's not it's not really coming back up it's like i'm really going down and i'm not coming back up and so that's why you start to see in between the ages of 45 and 55 we have the most diagnoses of anxiety and depression it makes so much sense wait hold on
you see the most diagnoses of anxiety and depression in women between the age of 45 and 55 absolutely why doctor shepherd
because this is when estrogen our key response our key hormone and how it interacts with the brain is going to be impacted because our mood or neurotransmitters are dopamine after menopause we start to see that dopamine receptors are 30% less and so if that's our hormone that's going to be around to make us feel good and now it's not there anymore what do you think is gonna happen and so this is why it's so crucial that people understand the mind body connection is
so important and you are not alone during this journey you are not the only 1 who's experiencing this and the more that we can look inward and say i'm going through this i'm gonna be okay but i also understand why wouldn't that make someone feel better absolutely
because you can't solve the problem if you don't know what the problem is
you can't
and if you are starting to experience higher states of anxiety or you're feeling depressed
yeah
and you're not looking at the correlation with your age and understanding that by 45 a lot of the estrogen is gone and your body's going through major changes which impact your brain which literally can be the cause of this happening
do you see how it impacts careers it impacts relationships your personal life yeah you're feeling you're going through just like this and that's what women used to come in and tell me because they couldn't put their finger on it they would say i don't feel right something's off i feel like i'm just so emotional i can watch you know tv and cry to commercial or someone can say 1 thing to me and i will snap and they feel as if it's an out of body experience they're literally watching themselves have these responses
well kinda is because you're out of the body you have been living in
yeah
for the last 40 some years because the hormones are radically changing and so your body is probably like what the hell is going on
mhmm
can you explain how estrogen starts to decline
in your late twenties and kinda what are the big general age markers doctor shepherd for when you got a 100% of this if things are working well and you're not eating too much processed food and you're managing your stress okay and you're taking care of yourself which a lot of us don't let's just assume that you're kinda like the the the the 1 that's doing it right on the planet what age doctor shepherd do you start to see estrogen decline or progesterone or testosterone in women
mel this is why this conversation is so important for a 20 and 30 year old
okay
so let's bring it back to the reproductive phase right so our body's designed to do this we know in the reproductive phase as ob gyns we start to see a change and a decline in egg quality and the ability to get pregnant spontaneously after the age of 35 k now why do you think
oh because estrogen starts to fall off a cliff yeah is that right yeah does testosterone and progesterone also change in a woman's body at the age of 32
i tried and progesterone which impacts what we're able to do with releasing that follicle right so our chemical messenger is not able to tell the ovary we're gonna fire off an egg as readily right so it's like i'm not doing it this month or the quality of the egg not really gonna be that great and then testosterone is also taking a decline although it is more subtle but that's where we start to see that drop in estrogen which is some women especially i'm i'm 1 of them who had kids later on in our age i think
what what is that awful term that they we use
they use geriatric pregnancy
yeah what the i
like who came up with that i not clearly not a woman not a woman
yes
and so you know even i start to see a lot of my patients having kids later on in their life what happens is usually after they deliver they start to experience the perimenopausal kind of symptoms hot flashes night sweats mood changes because they've kind of entered into that phase just like very quickly after delivering their children
wow so at 35
mhmm
do you know the percentage roughly of how much estrogen kind of functioning is left
well what we do know is looking at it from a pregnancy perspective yep in the ability to get pregnant after the age of 35 versus after 40 and then 42 is another marker when we're thinking of fertility of when it really starts to drop off and so the ability to get pregnant in your 20s is much more than in your 30s and then after 35 it does take a drop then again at 40 and 42 is usually when we start to see another decline wow
yeah well it's it's so helpful to understand this against the backdrop of from an evolutionary perspective what a woman's body is actually designed to do from you know like a physical and biological standpoint yeah and when you look at it that that lens and you understand you know we we were i was researching something else and was kind of gobsmacked to consider that 50 years ago the life expectancy was in our fifties
mhmm
and we've gained 30 to 40 more years in the last 5 to 6 decades based on you know improvements in health and sanitation and medical research
do you know what we haven't accounted for that gap in life expectancy with now estrogen still gone and that's why we still see women living longer yes that's great i'm all for that but we're living life in poor quality of health and we're seeing these health measures of what women typically they have more dementia they have more osteoporosis they have more heart disease number 1 killer of women is because that estrogen was gone but we're still living longer
this is so important to understand because i think what we do as women is we throw our hands in the air and say well there's nothing why is this out and all this stuff but when you look at it across the historical perspective and the the fairly recent life expectancy jump
so when we look at life expectancy we know that women are typically was used to be 57 58 was the life expectancy but what is the average age of menopause 51 52 so it makes sense biologically that estrogen is kind of tanked yep and the life expectancy of what the body is able to do because estrogen is not there
50 or 60 years ago
is gonna be a not a problem not a problem makes sense but now we have improved with science technology nutrition sanitation to our seventies and eighties but we have not accommodated the body to function without estrogen
wow it's almost like you know if you have a car how and and and you don't have any gas in it yeah how is it gonna work for you to flex just keep drive just hit the gas harder and stop complaining right and it'll work
but isn't that the analogy that of what we're told to do just keep going i don't care if you feel crazy i don't care if your bones are breaking just keep going and so this allows us again to take that step back and have more grace with our bodies mhmm but it's because we now understand the biology of our bodies
you know i have never heard it put that way before i feel like i'm starting to understand this topic at a completely different level i'm just so grateful that you are here with us today i have so many more questions but i wanna give our sponsors a chance to share a few words and i also wanna give you a moment to be able to share this with women in your life that you care about and don't go anywhere because we have so much more to learn from the amazing doctor jessica shepherd when we return after the short break so stay with
us
welcome back it's your buddy mel robbins today you and i are getting to spend time with the extraordinary doctor jessica shepherd the best selling book is generation m and we're talking all things hormone i feel smarter don't you feel smarter i'm so proud of us for learning about this so doctor shepherd is there things that you can do in your thirties and forties to slow the breakdown of this hormone decline
there is not but there are ways that you can help your body do better things in other words optimize the ability for the body to do it even in the absence of estrogen and progesterone
like what what are the most important things
i would say nutrition and exercise because those are fundamental things you can do every day or you know even if it's 4 times a week but those are things that are giving our metabolic health and our mitochondrial health the best ways that they can function even in the absence or the decline of some of these hormones so that's gonna be paying attention to decreasing your processed foods your sugar because your body just doesn't respond to it as as readily as it did in twenties and thirties which i would not advocate for people just because they're 20 and 30 to eat these types of foods but then also exercise in weight training to be able to build that muscle up
so it can utilize the glucose better so that your body's just not sitting with the glucose
do women that have children after 35 tend to enter perimenopause or menopause earlier
it's not necessarily that they're entering it earlier it's that we do have a significant change of hormones in pregnancy and what we do see is after pregnancy so in the postpartum phase yep you're gonna have that shift again trying to get back to homeostasis mhmm
which you have taught us doctor shepherd you gotta give your body grace
give your body grace
9 months to a year it could take till you feel like yourself again
so if you think that's 9 months postpartum 9 months typically for a pregnancy that's almost like a year and a half time frame
mhmm
and so in that year and a half is where you start to see that now they're entering into the natural kind of fluctuation on the decline towards menopause and so it does seem a little jarring or quick but really the body was already on its way gotcha and now we've kind of distracted our body or ourselves from what was happening because we were pregnant and then after your body's like well i was still going in this direction i'm gonna continue to go in that direction
so we've covered what happens at 35 40 and 42 let's talk about perimenopause medically speaking doctor shepherd what does that word mean and what is the kind of typical age range that of women that covers
well that would be me i'm i'm perimenopausal proud of it but perimenopause has been more of a confusing term i think in what we've seen in this menopause surge because menopause is very clinical in its definition but perimenopause is confusing because it can last anywhere from 3 or 7 years 10 years because everyone's different in that decline and fluctuation but it's truly when our hormones estrogen progesterone and testosterone are starting to go down and shift down and you start to have these symptoms here or there some people may not have symptoms i mean when does that start when you're 35 some people i have had patients and i would definitely say sometimes i'm like wow you are pretty young but i'm never gonna take that experience away from them that they may start to experience symptoms of perimenopause
so what are the symptoms of perimenopause and what physical changes happen when you are in that zone that i'm just gonna put a big hoop here like 35 to 50 ish like like this could be the zone that you're in
this could be the experience and the time frame so i would definitely say hot flashes and night sweats kind of here or there people will be like did i just have a hot flash and then you may not feel it again for months mhmm definite change in weight i've had so many women who come in and being like i'm doing the same 2 mile run i'm doing the same elliptical for an hour and now the weight's going absolutely nowhere irregularity in periods that's where we start to see lighter heavier now i have 2 times a month now i skip 3 months then it came back and a lot of that has to do with that fluctuation remember the car assembly lines some people didn't show up to work that day they're just like i'm not i'm not in the assembly line car that you've been driving is starting to sputter it's sputtering yes and
so those start to happen through that time frame
why do we gain weight in the middle like why do we get the back fat and the fanny pack in the front and all the things that you've been doing
and all the things that you're not asking for quite frankly yeah
and like the flappy ass arms like you don't have those but i but like i would have like these meat wings it didn't matter how often i was doing triceps
yeah
it didn't it still doesn't work but what what why did we gain weight there
so we gain for multiple reasons again it's never just 1 thing so our fat cells do respond to estrogen we know that this our estrogen receptors all over
the body because they were because there's estrogen every part of the body
right so think about when you're pregnant and you do gain weight that's for a safety reason to kind of cushion the body to accommodate the pregnancy right so fat cells do respond to estrogen
eating my way through the
entire body that that may have been some other reason but we we can blame it on the fat cells but there's accommodations into how they respond so they can shrink they can get bigger they can migrate and then they can usually go back so typically after pregnancy a lot of people will go back to their their the way that their body has appeared before in perimenopause that response remember we said chemical messengers but if there's no estrogen the receptors they're waiting for it it's not responding so fat cells can enlarge but maybe they now don't have the capacity to shrink oh wait a minute
so you have estrogen receptors in your triceps and in your in
your fat cells and in your muscle
yeah but there but there's certain fat cells like i think everybody listening can can go yes mel it's true there's certain areas it's like every pair of pants mhmm
it's different so that's the migration
it fit it's literally i'm like what happened i feel like a twinkie on legs here like i just like it
just migrates so it goes from your your hips and your butt
which is
what we see in twenties and thirties right because it's that's where it's supposed to be in that time frame and then it migrates to that abdominal area the fanny pack area because the estrogen is like well we're not responding in that way but we're also gonna shift now where the fat cells are so they kind of migrate more to that area
is it because as the estrogen declines your your reproductive center's like sucking it all up and then everybody else is starving for it in your body
it's really the it's the biology of the body it's it's really what your body is designed to do as we get older because even men go through that they don't go through it as i would say maybe as rapidly or profound as women but you do notice too as men start to age
they start to look pregnant there's a lot of causes that because of the testosterone that's
but they also have estrogen as well just smaller amounts but this is the beauty in what the body is designed to do it does it even though we don't love for it to do it but it does happen during that timeframe a lot to do with estrogen and also our muscle our muscle starts to decrease as well so if you have if you don't think of like a pie graph
why does our muscles start to decrease
yeah so this is again because estrogen receptors and we're all are
in the muscles
are in the muscles
and when your muscles are getting estrogen your muscles stay strong
right well not necessarily strong strong is more of a like a power kind of force thing but the actual muscle mass so the amount
wow so the so how does keep going i'm sorry
no think of think of a pie graph
like jesus okay go ahead
if you think of a pie graph and maybe most of it was filled out with muscle and a little bit of fat content there in the pie graph as you start to age that pie graph shifts and we start to see the fat increase
i don't want it to increase
i know neither do i i'm this is this is not what i want either but the muscle mass starts to decrease as well as the fat mass is increasing
you know what's crazy about this is that you when it when you go through it you literally like what i'm getting from this conversation is that the composition of the body itself is changing absolutely because the hormones have changed so literally i love that image of a pie chart because if you think of a whole pie and if for a lot of your life as a woman the majority of it was kind of muscle mass but then as estrogen declines that freaking wedge starts to get smaller and smaller yeah and
now fat's there and you didn't do anything different
you didn't do anything different wow yeah and so we have the ability you'd asked earlier
is this not fair doctor scholl
it is not fair
something why would
you like help us right life is not fair this is 1 of those things that you're like if we could maybe take this part out but you'd said it earlier about is there a way to you know maybe stave off this this kind of hormone change we can't but we can fix the pie graph which is why i say that weight training okay
i have a crazy question ask is anybody researching whether or not it's possible to have women continue to have a period like for the rest of their life most women listen to like i don't wanna have a period for the rest of my life but i literally am like if i will have no brain fog and i'll keep my muscles and there's no flesh fanny pack down there and i'm not an irritable bitch i would take a period
actually there is research that is actually mentioned in generation m of how do we prolong not necessarily the period how do we prolong the durability and duration of estrogen mhmm right we talked about that gap your own estrogen versus hormone replacement therapy correct how do we keep the ovary alive in the sense of allowing it to still emit estrogen on its own and that's where the research is really looking at because what did we we say there's a gap life expectancy because estrogen was down
now we're living longer if we could fill that gap with having estrogen around right naturally
yeah
then there is a likelihood that we would start to see decline in heart disease decline in osteoporosis decline in dementia and that would be an amazing innovative way for us to have better quality of life even though we're living longer
have they done any studies and i realized hormone replacement therapy is had a had had issues because if i understand it correctly when it first came out there was like a bunch of junk science that has been disproven that scared people yeah and now all of those old claims have been basically refuted and so for the vast majority of women it is a extraordinarily safe and life changing medical option and for women who have a certain risk of cancer or a certain health history it is not an option mhmm but given the kind of limited scope of wide range use has there been any research that suggests that women that are candidates for hormone replacement therapy and who do take it have lower risks of dementia and osteoporosis and heart disease absolutely
so i'm glad we are in this day and age in science where we can definitely say that there is an impact in how women live their lives and decreasing their risk of death in osteoporosis i'll start with osteoporosis because when we actually look at the recommendations even from the menopause society which when they say if you take hrt this is what it's gonna help with now we know that it helps with the symptoms of menopause hot flashes night sweats etcetera but when we look at bone health it is actually proven that estrogen impacts bone health in a good way obviously but it's not our first line of therapy they haven't said it's a first line of therapy if someone comes in and they're like i have osteopenia which is like weakening of the bone that i should say you should automatically go on estrogen but we know it helps
so that is there for osteoporosis now dementia brain health which to me is like fundamentally 1 of the biggest
parts of the bone so if we know though that yeah when there is a complete drop off of estrogen that it spikes a woman's risk for osteoporosis it doesn't take somebody like no offense to to people who are just wildly brilliant like you are but common sense it tells you
right
clearly there's a connection because we don't see women in their thirties getting osteoporosis
absolutely which is why i think that's where we need to challenge i'm like why on earth wouldn't you medical societies absolutely e
d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e d e
d exactly what you're saying because even in the clinical space we need to do a better job at saying we know this this is data and we should be encouraging our patients to consider because the goal is not to say that everyone has to be on it like it's mandated but to give you the data the literature so that you know the reason why and you get to make that decision for yourself but if i'm not giving you that information or that choice you may not even know to make that decision for yourself
let's talk about dementia what does the research say about the impact of hormone replacement therapy giving women estrogen and the outcomes with dementia
now that was 1 of the studies when they looked at the whi which is 20 years ago and now we have so much better research that links estrogen depletion and decline and what that does for later on in life when we look at dementia so i'll give you numbers that make sense when we look at alzheimer's and neurodegenerative diseases 70 percent of those cases are women so clearly there's a link between why are women getting this more than males and the answer is because when we look at that sharp estrogen decline estrogen is 1 of the best anti inflammatory substances in our body
so when we lose estrogen we have an increase in inflammation and that inflammation causes our neurons to have hardened plaques which lead later down the line because the course of how it builds and what it you know how it shows up is as much as 30 years so that's why you start to see women having dementia in their 70s and 80s but the the process started back in their 50s why because of estrogen decline wow yeah
can you share just the data on hrt because you when you're in perimenopause are you a candidate for hrt
this is 1 of the biggest questions like now that we see in hormone replacement therapy and perimenopause what we used to do and this is again when i was training which was about 15 18 years ago is that we would wait till women reached menopause we had it's like they almost had to prove it they would come in in buckets of sweat and i would be like well when was your last period and they're like well it was 5 months ago and i'm like so sorry can't offer you hrt we have now gotten into a day and age where we know if your hormones are declining and fluctuating and you're having a symptom i absolutely should be offering you hormone replacement therapy as something why wouldn't it's a car analogy again why am i going to wait until there's no more car or no more gas in the engine but i'm still plugging away why wouldn't when the indicator comes on why would i not say this is a great opportunity for me to get gas it's the same thing with hormones why are we depleting ourselves why are we allowing women to feel their absolute worst before we will offer them something that is going to help how they feel and their vitality
so what about women who are not candidates
yeah for
it what are their options
so their options so there are actually a lot of options i would well maybe not a lot but there are options and so coming from a day and age when there were no options i think that it's really amazing that we are able to offer that i think that the list of who cannot take hormone replacement therapy is probably good to go over
yes
so that everyone can make sure that if i am or not i need to know great so this would be someone who has a personal history right they themselves have had breast cancer and specifically a hormone receptor positive type of cancer right responds to hormones so the reason why i kind of double down on personal history is that there is a lot around breast cancer when we think i've had a family member a cousin an aunt that doesn't put you in the same category as having a personal history of breast cancer
so not all breast cancers are the same correct and just because you've had breast cancer doesn't mean you're automatically not a candidate for hrt
that's there very nuanced conversation okay and you definitely should be talking to your doctor specifically about what type of cancer that you've had the course of cancer that has taken on your you know your life but also the age of of when you were diagnosed and what that means okay and the second thing is if you've had an pulmonary embolism you've had a clot in your lung or even if you've had maybe a very large event of a of a clot somewhere else in your body it has to be pretty significant for you not to be a candidate for hormone replacement therapy and why do those 2 things make you not a candidate for hormone replacement therapy that's a great question because of the hormones and the response of the body where whether it's the clot or the breast cancer that introducing hormones again may precipitate or cause another event like that gotcha
so based on your personal history and there's a narrow window of women who have a particular type of personal breast cancer that may make them not a candidate or if you've had a certain type of pulmonary embolism
mhmm
that you're not a candidate in those cases
right
because the introduction of hormone might stimulate that condition coming back
yeah and so for a clot you may get another 1 and for breast cancer may cause recurrence
got it yeah okay but even because i think there's also this widespread belief that if you've had any breast cancer history or if you've yourself have had breast cancer automatically you can't do it
yeah because there's a history of has your family had it and been exposed to and what was that and why do you have a genetic predisposition to that same cancer in your family so those again that should be where that list is being kind of narrowed down when you talk to your doctor but i want women to even if they have a family history that's where the conversation starts you still don't exactly i've had so many women who are like oh i can't do it then they just never talk about it and i'm like but what if what if you found yourself that you can be exposed to it wouldn't that be great is there an age where it's too late to start hormone replacement therapy this is another beautiful question because for a long time from that whi study 20 years ago we used to say you can't start hormones if you've started 10 years after your last period which is clinically you know menopause or after the age of 60 okay and
so we have shifted those quite frankly and again it's a nuanced conversation but there are plenty of women and we know it's safe to start after the age of 60 and also more than 10 years after menopause especially that last 1 i just said because what if you experience menopause at 42 45 which is not typical but what if you did and now you're 55 hearing us today and you're like well it's 10 years i can't start hormone replacement therapy absolutely you should be in your doctor's office saying is this a possibility for me well if you've already pushed through that window
so you have not had a period for years and you've just muscled your way through this you're driving that car down the road no gas in the tank pedal to the metal exhaust all the time what might happen if you introduce hormone replacement therapy now
you know what might happen you might feel better really yeah there's so many women who again going back to the i'm gonna numb not really feeling that but you are and so many women once they get on hormone replacement therapy that exact example that you gave 55 year old who maybe went 10 years or
i'm even thinking the 60 year old or the 62 year old who was like oh well you know it was still taboo and it's too late for me now
yeah a lot of women don't understand how they could feel because we subject ourselves to feeling i don't feel great but i'm just gonna keep going and the other thing that we talked about what do we say osteoporosis heart disease so it may not have the same effect i will make that statement if you started hormone replacement earlier
right right but it might have a preventative effect
it might
it might also get rid of the brain fog yeah it might help you sleep better
let me give you an example i had a patient who came in and again nuanced conversation she was 67 but she was still having hot flashes which is again not typical because usually they'll wane and they'll go down you know when you're in your fifties she was still experiencing them to a way where it was impacting our quality of life so i did have that conversation with her she was very nervous and i said well here's what we'll do why not give yourself the chance and what if we just trial and see how you feel after 3 to 6 months she's still on it mhmm how did she feel she felt amazing she's like why was i living like this for
so long
wow i think i hear somebody hitting share right now and sending this to their mother and to their aunt and to so many women who honestly like were not served the medical care that they deserve
and the diligence and i think the conversations because someone else could walk in behind her who's the same age or even maybe younger and we're like maybe you're not the candidate but we had the conversation
right
but if we're not having the conversation then there's nothing to talk about
right and maybe you are a candidate and maybe you could feel better and wouldn't that be absolutely incredible yeah wow you know what are other tools yes in addition to hormone replacement therapy that women need to understand
i think that this is where when i talk about grieving the loss of what we used to be that's where the mind and body come in and so being able to modulate how our body functions has a lot to do with what we give it and so giving it that loving care with looking at our diet but also alternatives which i advocate for all of my patients is things such as mindfulness meditation how do we take the brain and allow it to not be as jittery and over processed and overstimulated comes with how we are able to teach it to quiet down acupuncture tai chi has actually been shown in study to help decrease some hot flashes and night sweats vasomotor symptoms for women and even if you think of the culture of asians asian women if you look at a study they had their vasomotor symptoms and menopausal symptoms for shorter duration and not as intense what is a vasomotor what'd you call it hot flashes and night sweats oh that's a fancy word for it that's the that's the fancy word for those 2 okay
so my husband's like you just soak the sheets i'm like i'm having my vasomotor in the air
yeah absolutely and so when you look at
there too
doesn't it yes it doesn't like make it so you're like that doesn't sound i'm having a vasomotor symptom it's that they have shorter duration decreased intensity and a lot of that has to do with their their lifestyle their practice what they eat what they consume but how they live their lives and also the practices that they do with movement of their body and being able to create the mind and the body throughout this whole transition
so there's no no way to actually naturally recreate estrogen by lifting weights or taking supplements or doing that kind of thing
no you're it's kind of like you're hijacking and bypassing the actual decline in hormones but using the other parts of the body to elevate those and to make and to optimize those parts of the body to offset what's going on biologically with the hormones
oh so i see so the exercise and the stress reduction and the change in the diet forces your body to make new connections and workarounds in the place of the role that estrogen plays
right so we're using the body yeah
so if you exercise and you get that incredible flood of neurochemicals i think they call it after you go for a walker after you lift weights or after you do that yoga class that works its its magic in your brain and helps a little bit with the brain fog
right because our dopamine and our serotonin are neurotransmitters which when we see depression they are decreased okay you just said when you exercise you get that flood of dopamine you get that increase in serotonin which is going to elevate our mood in lieu of losing hormones
doctor shepherd could you talk to us about sleeping every 1 of my friends is having trouble sleeping like every woman i know in their forties or fifties and i have a particular person that i love who has what she calls her little helper her advil pm i'm like you gotta stop taking that she's like but i'm taking my melatonin i'm taking my progesterone and you know i i got my cooling sheets like i like i'm i i still can't sleep what is going on with hormones and sleep
i'll i'll name 3 that are really categorical to sleep and the reason why sleep is so important let's lay the foundation is that sleep actually is critical for our body in repair and recovery and if our body's not able to do that then it cannot function well so when people have sleep disorders or sleep issues mhmm these are the people that we see later getting obstructive sleep disorder heart disease asthma and also increase in obesity right so all things that are gonna continue to decrease in quality of life so now that we have that foundation of why sleep is
so important the 3 hormones that are crucial for that are gonna be your estrogen your progesterone and your cortisol and your cortisol which i'll start with has to do with your circadian rhythm the reasons why we sleep why we should sleep certain times and cortisol has releases throughout the night usually in the midnight and then early in the morning around 5am okay so if your cortisol member these are chemical messengers that work on a time frame if they're disrupted
and cortisol is highly impacted by your lifestyle and the stress factors
stress life and estrogen as well okay right so the estrogen decline now gives you hot flashes and night sweats so now you're waking up at the middle of the night because you're having a night sweat so then your circadian rhythm which was impacted by cortisol is also taking a hit it's deregulated and you're not getting good sleep quality and then progesterone progesterone is the comfy hormone it likes to relax us it likes us to kind of settle down and feel good and so we're also having fluctuations in progesterone so it can't do the job that it really would like to do which was give you sleep quality and relaxation
so all of these different turns and like declines and it's impacting our sleep which then impacts our health and that's why we're starting to see that sleep or sleep health rather is so imperative and we need to pay more attention to our sleep
so what do we do
yes so this is where we look at repleting maybe our hormones hormone replacement therapy can be a vehicle or a tool to kind of get you back to where you need to be hormonally but then also we can look at practices a lot of times during that kind of deregulation or brain a lot of women will say my mind just races at night
what should we do
ruminating so decreasing rumination is where we need to do our work our homework with quieting the brain down so that is gonna be your meditation and your mindfulness taking the screen away before you go to bed i'm talking to myself as i say that and then the other thing is actually when we look at cbd and what it's able to do as well has been helpful it is very important and i'll say this candidly you have to know where you're sourcing it from and so cbd we have endocannabinoid receptors in our bodies which also contribute to relaxation is that you have to appreciate where it's being sourced and then seeing is it have cbn which is another part of the plant that actually helps with relaxation
so that's another way as well so mindfulness that's our homework making sure what are you eating there are foods that are gonna be inflammatory and gonna kick off that cortisol so decline in in alcohol oh decline in processed foods and sugar
you fired doctor shepherd we're we're we're done
it's and it's not and it's not fair
no it's true if you wanna get a good night's sleep yeah don't even have a glass of like it is you know 1 of the things though is do you believe as a medical doctor that you can through some of these lifestyle changes boundaries with your phone not looking at your if you're not even having your phone in your bedroom having more of a set schedule all the stuff that experts recommend mindfulness do you believe you can train yourself to be a better sleeper if you get serious about it absolutely i've seen it through and through i think that even in my personal life i was starting to see sleep disturbances and i had to take a real hard stop and being like what's really going on and taking that time to again reflect on yourself and i think that is self care is sometimes self care yeah it can be getting a manicure or pedicure but how am i gonna take care of myself requires peeling away the layers of saying am i contributing to the best version of myself or not and what are the ways that i can do that and how am i gonna pay attention to myself let's talk about the thyroid it seems like a lot of people talk about having a thyroid issue what does the thyroid do the thyroid is this cute little organ that is the metabolic kind of engine of our bodies it really is kind of the we are gonna go at this pace at this rate we're gonna make things go quick we're gonna make things go slow which is why when people have hypo which is less levels of that thyroid hormone things are moving slower right typically they'll gain a little bit more weight they're a little bit more sluggish have fatigue syndromes and then people who have too much of that thyroid they're doing things too fast it's like this metabolic train is like really pumping it's like the speed train and you're like slow it down
so the goal is to keep it in that range where everything is moving right it's kind of like is that the goldilocks a little bit too much a little bit too little just enough so we want it in that just enough phase
so the thyroid which is basically setting the pace it's it's either going too slow hypo or too fast hyper that it impacts hormones because it impacts the rate of release
right the rate of release and how quickly things are should be going or how slow they should be going
gotcha
and so when we start to see you can have heat intolerance if it's too much and cold intolerance if it's too slow so the goal really is to kind of keep it in that homeostasis and so when that starts to shift it is very interconnected with estrogen and so we start to see a little bit more thyroid issues as women go through perimenopause and menopause because the estrogen is not there to talk to the thyroid
if you have a problem with your thyroid how would you know it for sure
oh that is 1 of the i would say that is 1 of the hormones we can definitely see on labs
hope that you get a blood test
absolutely gotcha
and then how do you treat it
so you can treat it either through medication depending on if it's severely too high or too low that's when a patient needs medication to kind of get it to homeostasis
then you do
have people who have symptoms and it may not be all the way out of that kind of normal range that's how you can impact with diet that's how you can impact with exercise as well and so it's really important that you understand your body if it's changing if something is happening that doesn't feel right to you to make sure that you see your doctor because the goal is not to wait until you're like completely just feeling horrible and then now we do have a problem is that if it's shifting in that normal range to too high or too low but it's not quite disease state yet that we know that right and
so that again is the preventative portion of why we need to take care of our bodies before we hit that wall and now we're in disease
you know i want to shift gears a little bit and talk about a few health conditions that women see and have you doctor shepherd help us understand them 1 is pcos can you talk to us about what that is
pcos is 1 of those i wish it were termed differently it stands for polycystic ovarian syndrome so when we use the word syndrome in medicine it means it has a variety of different things that contribute to the disorder
okay
so it's not just 1 specific thing so the reason why it's a syndrome is because it relates to the amount of follicles in your ovaries may be increased right so your body's supposed to be doing a certain thing so i'll give you an example if it's supposed to say i'm using arbitrary numbers here if you're gonna have 5 follicles in your ovary and that's what it does every month and now someone has 20 that that's different than it should do right so you're gonna have kind of these fluctuations of hormones so now we're back to the hormone part of the syndrome which is we usually see an increase in testosterone right
so everything is supposed to be at the level it's supposed to be so now if testosterone's a little bit higher it's going to be sending messages not in the way or the amount or frequency that it should be so there's another thing is how we have our cycles right so you start to see your cycles be more irregular i've had patients who have severe pcos and they won't have a period for like 9 months or a year and then they'll get 1 just randomly so you have all these changes that are ovarian in nature but the real heart of pcos is actually a metabolic disease
so i'll go back to what metabolic means is really the function of how your body is doing internally usually from a glucose and an insulin perspective we spend so much time doubling down on the ovaries malfunctioning and it's an issue there and we got to but really a lot of it has to do with gut health nutrition and insulin and glucose
but do you typically treat it by birth control or how
do you think they do i would say that's what we typically treat it with do i am i a fan of what we typically treat it with no because then we're just focusing on the ovarian portion of it so many of my patients i work with functional nutritionists but i also use that timeframe to say maybe so for example now put you on a glp which can then impact your insulin and glucose and then shift the body's ability to function the way it should
oh that's so cool yeah wow so glp ones are a medical tool to help balance hormone and regulate hormones absolutely
well to balance the insulin and glucose and the metabolic health portion of pcos and a lot of times the diseases that we have are from a metabolic perspective and so that's why when we look at the studies now with glp ones yes you get the benefit of weight loss or people are on it because they're diabetics but when we look at the whole body as this beautiful machine and how insulin and glucose can actually shape or maybe not help some of the functions of the body is when you're able to again get it back to where it's supposed to be the rest of the body is like thank you
now i can do what i need to do wow
let's talk about endometriosis yes what is it and what are signs that you may be at risk for it or
that you have it so endometriosis which is i'm so glad i spent 10 years being a minimally invasive gynecologist cause that's the patients we would see mainly were endometriosis patients is that it is when the lining so when we have our uterus we have that little kind of cavity within our uterus which is where we shed endometrium in the lining and we get our period
so so endometrium is the medical name for the thing that ends up on the pad that's it wow okay
i love that you just put that perspective to it but that's exactly what it is and so when you shed the lining that lining is only supposed to be there in that cavity what happens is when that tissue may go somewhere else could go on the bowel could go on the uterus it could go on the bladder
and when your tissue goes somewhere else so it
kind of like trails and ends up in other places in the abdominal cavity
so it's almost like your lining that makes up what is your period starts to flake and float around other parts of your body yeah
it can kind of travel in other places and when it gets to those places it causes pain most most common symptom of endometriosis is pain and also infertility right because it's impacting the other organs in the reproductive system now we do know that there are it's an underdiagnosed disease 1 in 10 women will have endometriosis 1
in 10
1 in 10 they may not experience it the same but we are under diagnosing it and the other thing is that there is somewhat of a genetic predisposition or a likelihood of getting endometriosis if you had your mother and or sister have endometriosis
how do you treat it
the best way to treat it is to look at it from the root cause which is estrogen so if we are able to say how can we decrease the level of estrogen that's creating this inflammatory response so there are many ways that we can do that some people are put on birth control remember we talked about suppressing we can also use medications that are specifically designed to decrease estrogen specifically for that reason for endometriosis and then some people need surgery and the reason they need surgery is because it creates these kind of adhesions or these kind of scar tissue in the pelvis and
so that can cause a pain and or infertility and we can go in there as a minimally invasive surgeon and get those kind of nodules and adhesions out and that's how the patient can feel better so there's a lot of different ways that we can actually impact endometriosis which is why we should be talking about it more
definitely chapter 9 of your best selling book generation m i love the title thin skin thinner hair let me let me read a little from page 169 dry irritated skin bruises breakouts too much hair where you don't want it your face too little hair where you do want it your head these are just some of the changes fluctuating hormone levels can unleash on your appearance and this is no matter what age you are and this was fascinating to read that estrogen spurs the growth of collagen a protein that helps support skin muscle and bones it's essentially the scaffolding that holds everything up
so let's talk about the role of hormones with your skin and with your hair where do you wanna start
i wanna start with skin because we all know when we're in our younger ages that our skin is very kind of it glows it has this ability to not have wrinkles and so as we start to age which is a biological feature of what we're gonna go through decline in estrogen can't then go to that part of our skin that impacts the collagen which gives us our ability to be plump to be firm and
so what do we start to see as we age is decline in estrogen now can't support the collagen which is the framework of that that structure and the ability for our skin to do that so another example is pregnancy right in pregnancy we usually see which is a different type of estrogen but it's a severe increase right because that's what supports the pregnancy a lot of women will say my skin in pregnancy and my hair in pregnancy is just phenomenal and the reason is is because there's this amazing estrogen support when the baby comes out and the estrogen declines a lot of people are like
now i'm losing my hair or my skin is really really crappy that has to do with that balance of estrogen so now when we're losing estrogen at a decline and it's not coming back the skin responds it's like estrogen's not around i can't be plump i'm gonna have these wrinkles my skin is starting to sag a little and that's because of the estrogen can contribute to the collagen which is scaffold
gotcha so is there anything that you can do to- yeah
help improve collagen yes so it's the way that you can do it directly on your skin which is when now we start to hear more about estrogen creams that you can apply to your skin right
and then that stimulates collagen growth
so it's the collagen growth but also the blood flow estrogen is a very big proponent of blood flow and vascularity to areas and that's what we need in order for our skin to look plump and not have the issues that it has in addition to the collagen yes and so then the other part of that is if a woman is on hormone replacement therapy and she's either taking a pill a patch a cream she's now giving her body back that estrogen which allows it again to have the replenishment of estrogen which supports her skin amazing women get marketed to like crazy and particularly for those 20 and 30 year olds that are buying 50 products and going through a 30 step skincare routine doctor shepherd based on the research what actually in terms of the products can help your skin i think that there is a lot of consumerism
so there's a lot of products out there that are not necessarily going to get you the outcome that you want and so when we look at skin products specifically i think as we're getting older we need to look at products that have maybe retinol retin a that have things that actually are supporting collagen estrogen is 1 of those things but it doesn't necessarily mean because something claims to get the outcome that you're gonna do it the other thing that i would say is we have to watch our diet so what we're inputting into our body has a lot to do with what the skin is able to do whether that's with foods that are supporting hydration whether it's foods that supporting vitamin deficiencies that have a lot to do with what we go through in menopause but our gut right our gut health is always very impactful for how our skin can respond to it what are the top foods you should eat for good skin oh i think the top food should be obviously your protein intake which can help your muscle but also antioxidants i love blueberries i don't think that it's a power food and everyone had just has to eat a blueberry but what i do know is it has
so many ways that it can kind of fill your day whether it's a snack whether it's added to something that it has the antioxidants which is also very helpful for our kind of gut health and the last thing that i think is looking at how we use our omega fatty acids is an important part so that would be like a nuts i think nuts are a great snack but also salmon has omega fatty 3 acids as well so that's important again for our gut health and again i think that when we look at our diet not everyone responds and that's why i don't love power foods is some people just don't respond the same way to certain foods
so making sure that you maybe talk to a nutritionist as you go through these stages in life because your body's gonna respond find out what's best for you and just don't take everything that you hear and saying that's gonna apply to me
when you start going through perimenopause or menopause do you need to change your skincare routine as estrogen plummets
you should really yes absolutely because the things that served your skin well when you're in your twenties and thirties are probably not gonna serve it in the same way 1 because of how our skin absorbs product is gonna be different
how does it change
it changes where it's not as porous porous just means if you were to think of like a screen on a window and things that can go in versus come out those things change because maybe it's more porous and it doesn't allow for the things that really should be staying in it kind of seeps out the other thing is that we have hot flashes and night sweats so that increases the amount of sweat that is going to be around our face and so that actually impacts it as well and then we talked about the whole collagen and the estrogen which is not there so there is multiple layers of why the skincare should change and things that i think are important to incorporate are we talked about retin a earlier but also when we look at maybe using devices that get to a deeper level of our skin to help restore that vitality to our skin but also helping correct some of the things on a deeper layer that we could never get to just from washing our face like what like lasers i think lasers are a beautiful way that people should if they can because sometimes they are pricey but even if you have the opportunity to get a laser treatment i think intermittently those can again create this better foundation
so that when we go home and maintain with other products we're having a good foundation
let's talk about thinning hair
yeah
because it's really it's real it's it's it is real and it's very disconcerting why does our hair thin
our hair has cycles it has a growth phase right so it goes through these different cycles and estrogen is a very big part of those cycles and how long it's gonna stay maybe in the growth phase and so that's again akin to when we were pregnant is we started to see a lot more hair growth because it stayed in that phase longer
so if i were to take folic acid because you know how you take folic acid and then your nails and your skin is that gonna help me now
it will help you but it's not gonna solve the problem
what is the problem
i think that the problem is our decline in estrogen is not able to impact the hair follicles it's not allowing to bring the blood flow to the hair follicles for growth but also the growth phase because if estrogen is a big part of how long it's gonna stay in the growth cycle of your hair then when you're taking away estrogen it can't stay in that phase forever
so if you're in your twenties or thirties and your hair is kind
of
thinning should you also be looking very seriously at hormone balance
i would say hormone in the sense of thyroid thyroid is that but also going back to our lifestyle factors what are some environmental factors are you taking maybe medications that are contributing to hair what foods are you eating and are you stressed
wow yeah and do any of those products that everybody is selling you see all over those how
i think those are products that actually work so for example minoxidil minoxidil is an actual medication that's used for hair growth and helping in that that hair cycle and maximizing the hair cycle but also creating vasodilation which just means opening the vessels and allowing the blood to flow to that area more so it does work the caveat to that is when you're not using it then it can't do the thing that it's gonna do so you may have some hair changes or hair growth cycle changes when you stop the drug
wow that you are so brilliant and so fascinating i have absolutely loved i i feel like i have learned so much today i feel so empowered i cannot wait to share this with every single woman i know starting with my 2 daughters and my mother and all my good friends what do you think doctor shepherd the most important thing that you want women to understand about their hormonal health
i think hormonal health represents who we are as women and the more that we vilify it or kind of fight against it then that's not ultimately helping who we can be in our best version of ourselves and so this transition really should be embraced and it really can herald the change in who we think of ourselves in identity in relationships in our power in our advocacy advocacy for ourselves and so i don't want you to leave yourself behind you should never leave yourself behind and bring yourself into this transition with your hormones in a way that it can be beautifully constructed to be the best version of yourself if the person listening who's been with us today takes just 1 thing from everything you shared and does something what is it that you want them to do i would say that the recreation of yourself requires that inner look into having self care and self love because we all deserve it and
so as you go through transitions in your life whether it's adolescence whether it's pregnancy whether it's menopause as those are moments in which you get to reflect inward and decide what would i like to do for myself and asking the important questions of who am i and where would i like to be
doctor shepherd what are your parting words
my parting words would be that we all have this opportunity to change the journey of what we've been given whether that's with circumstances whether that's with our family life whether that's with obstacles we go through to recreate and redirect who we are in our health but our health really requires the ability to take mind body connection and many times we dissociate and we disconnect and i would encourage anyone who's listening today and anyone that they can tell is that the importance of who we are in the end requires a mind body connection and i encourage everyone to take that opportunity to do that well doctor jessica shepherd i cannot thank you enough the best selling book is generation m but what i love most about what happened today at least for me is the mind body connection is a critical thing but because of everything you shared today i actually understand my body in a way that i've never understood it before and for that i am
so grateful and i know i speak on behalf of the person who's listening and for all of the women in their life that they will be sharing this with so thank you thank you thank you
thank you
and i also wanna thank you thank you for being here with us today thank you for being interested in your health and your happiness thank you for wanting to learn about this thank you for sharing this with all the women in your life that you care about and in case someone else tells you i wanted to be sure to tell you that i love you and i believe in you and i believe in your ability to use this information today to better understand your health to put yourself first to know that you deserve better and now that you understand how hormones work and how important they are that you use this information to improve your life and your health because you deserve that alrighty i'll see you in the very
next episode i'll be waiting to welcome you in the moment you hit play i'll see you there alright you guys tell me when you're ready oh you're good thanks hon okay good hey
uh-huh i was like hey it's not gonna be
okay is that sound right yeah okay great here we go
i'm so excited that was so unexpected when i walked out i'm typically not like a prior and i was like i love that oh my god it was it was yeah
well you did a great job i don't think so
okay great you good yeah i loved it
fantastic yeah we need to get em in to take some photos yes
yes photos and oh my gosh it's
so good alright let's get you on tv i know
i'm just so grateful thank you you were just magnificent
oh and 1 more thing and no this is not a blooper this is the legal language you know what the lawyers write and what i need to read to you this podcast is presented solely for educational and entertainment purposes i'm just your friend i am not a licensed therapist and this podcast is not intended as a substitute for the advice of a physician professional coach psychotherapist or other qualified professional got it good i'll see you in the
next episode stitcher